                   URBAN AND RURAL DEFINITIONS

Source: US Census Bureau
Released: Oct. 1995

URBAN AND RURAL

     The Census Bureau defines "urban" for the 1990 census as
comprising all territory, population, and housing units in
urbanized areas and in places of 2,500 or more persons outside
urbanized areas.  More specifically, "urban" consists of
territory, persons, and housing units in:

     1.   Places of 2,500 or more persons incorporated as cities,
          villages, boroughs (except in Alaska and New York), and
          towns (except in the six New England States, New York,
          and Wisconsin), but excluding the rural portions of
          "extended cities."

     2.   Census designated places of 2,500 or more persons.

     3.   Other territory, incorporated or unincorporated,
          included in urbanized areas.

     Territory, population, and housing units not classified as
urban constitute "rural."  In the 100-percent data products,
"rural" is divided into "places of less than 2,500" and "not in
places."  The "not in places" category comprises "rural" outside
incorporated and census designated places and the rural portions
of extended cities.  In many data products, the term "other
rural" is used; "other rural" is a residual category specific to
the classification of the rural in each data product.

     In the sample data products, rural population and housing
units are subdivided into "rural farm" and "rural nonfarm." 
"Rural farm" comprises all rural households and housing units on
farms (places from which $1,000 or more of agricultural products
were sold in 1989); "rural nonfarm" comprises the remaining
rural.

     The urban and rural classification cuts across the other
hierarchies; for example, there is generally both urban and rural
territory within both metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas.

     In censuses prior to 1950, "urban" comprised all territory,
persons, and housing units in incorporated places of 2,500 or
more persons, and in areas (usually minor civil divisions)
classified as urban under special rules relating to population
size and density.  The definition of urban that restricted itself
to incorporated places having 2,500 or more persons excluded many
large, densely settled areas merely because they were not
incorporated.  Prior to the 1950 census, the Census Bureau
attempted to avoid some of the more obvious omissions by
classifying selected areas as "urban under special rules."  Even
with these rules, however, many large, closely built-up areas
were excluded from the urban category.

     To improve its measure of urban territory, population, and
housing units, the Census Bureau adopted the concept of the
urbanized area and delineated boundaries for unincorporated
places (now, census designated places) for the 1950 census. 
Urban was defined as territory, persons, and housing units in
urbanized areas and, outside urbanized areas, in all places,
incorporated or unincorporated, that had 2,500 or more persons. 
With the following three exceptions, the 1950 census definition
of urban has continued substantially unchanged.  First, in the
1960 census (but not in the 1970, 1980, or 1990 censuses),
certain towns in the New England States, townships in New Jersey
and Pennsylvania, and Arlington County, Virginia, were designated
as urban.  However, most of these "special rule" areas would have
been classified as urban anyway because they were included in an
urbanized area or in an unincorporated place of 2,500 or more
persons.  Second, "extended cities" were identified for the 1970,
1980, and 1990 censuses.  Extended cities primarily affect the
figures for urban and rural territory (area), but have very
little effect on the urban and rural population and housing units
at the national and State levels--although for some individual
counties and urbanized areas, the effects have been more evident. 
Third, changes since the 1970 census in the criteria for defining
urbanized areas have permitted these areas to be defined around
smaller centers.

     Documentation of the urbanized area and extended city
criteria is available from the Chief, Geography Division, U.S.
Bureau of the Census, Washington, DC 20233.

Extended City

     Since the 1960 census, there has been a trend in some States
toward the extension of city boundaries to include territory that
is essentially rural in character.  The classification of all the
population and living quarters of such places as urban would
include in the urban designation territory, persons, and housing
units whose environment is primarily rural.  For the 1970, 1980,
and 1990 censuses, the Census Bureau identified as rural such
territory and its population and housing units for each extended
city whose closely settled area was located in an urbanized area. 
For the 1990 census, this classification also has been applied to
certain places outside urbanized areas.

     In summary presentations by size of place, the urban portion
of an extended city is classified by the population of the entire
place; the rural portion is included in "other rural."

URBANIZED AREA (UA)

     The Census Bureau delineates urbanized areas (UA's) to
provide a better separation of urban and rural territory,
population, and housing in the vicinity of large places.  A UA
comprises one or more places ("central place") and the adjacent
densely settled surrounding territory ("urban fringe") that
together have a minimum of 50,000 persons.  The urban fringe
generally consists of contiguous territory having a density of at
least 1,000 persons per square mile.  The urban fringe also
includes outlying territory of such density if it was connected
to the core of the contiguous area by road and is within 1 1/2
road miles of that core, or within 5 road miles of the core but
separated by water or other undevelopable territory.  Other
territory with a population density of fewer than 1,000 people
per square mile is included in the urban fringe if it eliminates
an enclave or closes an indentation in the boundary of the
urbanized area.  The population density is determined by (1)
outside of a place, one or more contiguous census blocks with a
population density of at least 1,000 persons per square mile or
(2) inclusion of a place containing census blocks that have at
least 50 percent of the population of the place and a density of
at least 1,000 persons per square mile.  The complete criteria
are available from the Chief, Geography Division, U.S. Bureau of
the Census, Washington, DC 20233. 
